Modify rule S6223: LaYC format (#2553)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6223/cfamily/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

Despite their names, the standard remove algorithms (`std::remove`, `std::remove_if`, `std::unique`) do not erase elements from a given range.
Instead, they shift the preserved (not removed) elements to the beginning of the range and return an iterator after the last preserved element.
The "removed" elements have unspecified values.

{cpp}20 introduced functions in the `std::ranges` namespace with the same names.
Aside from returning a subrange instead of an iterator, they exhibit the same behavior.

> Ignoring the result of any of these functions indicates a bug: operations on the container may access elements with unspecified values.

Reviewer: I agree with you. The sentence you added looks much better! :smile:

This may lead to invalid program states, data corruption, or crashes.

== How to fix it

The rule raises an issue when the result of `remove`, `remove_if`, or `unique` from the `std` or `std::ranges` namespace is ignored.

There are essentially three ways to fix this problem:

. Use the returned iterator or subrange to consider only the relevant elements. +
  This solution can be sufficient.
  It is also efficient but non-trivial and error-prone, as explained in the first example below.
. Use the _erase-remove_ idiom to drop elements from a container. +
  It consists of calling the container's `erase` member function using the produced iterator or subrange.
. Use other algorithms:

> * Since {cpp}20, `remove` and `remove_if` can be replaced with the free functions `std::erase` and `std::erase_if`, respectively.

Reviewer: Since there is a semantic difference between `std::remove` and `std::erase` (i.e., what if the user really wanted to do a `std::remove`?), I would instead suggest merging C++20 `std::erase` into the previous point about the "erase-remove" idiom, WDYT?

  auto newEnd = std::remove_if(v.begin(), v.end(), [](int x) { return x % 2 == 0; });
  // Compliant: elements are erased as expected.
  v.erase(newEnd, v.end());
}
----
+
This solution is semantically identical to the {cpp}20 version but more verbose.

==== Noncompliant code example

This example shows an incorrect use of the `std::ranges::unique` function:
`v` is left with indeterminate values.

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void removeDuplicateValues(std::vector<int>& v) {
  std::ranges::sort(v);
  // Noncompliant: some elements in "v" have an unspecified value.
  std::ranges::unique(v);
}
----

==== Compliant solution

We apply the _remove-erase_ idiom in this fixed version using the subrange returned by `std::ranges::unique`.

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
void removeDuplicateValues(std::vector<int>& v) {
  std::ranges::sort(v);
  // Compliant: the returned range is used to erase duplicated elements.
  auto [duplicateBegin, duplicateEnd] = std::ranges::unique(v);
  v.erase(duplicateBegin, duplicateEnd);
}
----

== Resources

=== Documentation

* Wikipedia - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erase%E2%80%93remove_idiom[Erase-remove idiom]

> * {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/remove[std::remove, std::remove_if]
> * {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/unique[std::unique]
> * {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/ranges/remove[std::ranges::remove, std::ranges::remove_if]
> * {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/ranges/unique[std::ranges::unique]
> * {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/erase2[std::erase, std::erase_if (std::vector)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/remove[`std::remove`, `std::remove_if`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/unique[`std::unique`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/ranges/remove[`std::ranges::remove`, `std::ranges::remove_if`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/ranges/unique[`std::ranges::unique`]
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector/erase2[`std::erase`, `std::erase_if` (for `std::vector`)]
```
Similar to the examples listed [here](https://github.com/SonarSource/rspec/blob/master/docs/link_formatting.adoc)?

The "removed" elements have unspecified values.

{cpp}20 introduced functions in the `std::ranges` namespace with the same names.
Aside from returning a subrange instead of an iterator, they exhibit the same behavior.

Ignoring the result of any of these functions indicates a bug:
It is impossible to distinguish removed elements in the container from the others.
As a result, any further operations on the container may access elements with unspecified values.
And this may lead to invalid program states, data corruption, or crashes.

== How to fix it

The rule raises an issue when the result of `remove`, `remove_if`, or `unique` from the `std` or `std::ranges` namespace is ignored.

There are essentially three ways to fix this problem:

. Use the returned iterator or subrange to consider only the relevant elements. +
  This solution can be sufficient.
  It is also efficient but non-trivial and error-prone, as explained in the first example below.
. Use the _erase-remove_ idiom to drop elements from a container.
* It consists of calling the container's `erase` member function using the produced iterator or subrange. +

> * Since {cpp}20, `remove` and `remove_if` can be replaced with the free functions `std::erase` and `std::erase_if`, respectively.

Author: love it, thanks

This solution is sufficient because the container `names` is getting destroyed at the end of the function.
Therefore, there is no risk of accessing unspecified values in other parts of the software.
Furthermore, this solution is relatively efficient as it does not perform unnecessary work on the container beyond the `std::remove` call.

[source,cpp]
----
char const* longestName(std::vector<char const*> names) {
  // Compliant: the returned iterator is used to limit the subsequent search.
  auto end = std::remove(names.begin(), names.end(), nullptr);

  if (end == names.begin()) { // Correct: invalid names are not considered.
    // No valid names.
    return nullptr;
  }

  auto longestNameIterator = std::max_element(
    names.begin(), end, // Correct: only valid names are iterated over.
    [](auto f1, auto f2) {
      return std::strlen(f1) < std::strlen(f2);
    }
  );
  return *longestNameIterator;
}
----

Another more modern approach is to use {cpp}20's `std::views::filter` instead.
Since this solution does not mutate the argument, it can be a const-reference or even a view.

[source,cpp]
----
char const* longestName(std::vector<char const*> const& names) {

>   // Compliant: std::views::filter is used instead.
>   auto validNames =
>     std::views::all(names) |
>     std::views::filter([](char const* e) { return e != nullptr; });
> 
>   if (std::ranges::empty(validNames)) {
>     // No valid names.
>     return nullptr;
>   }
> 
>   auto longestNameIterator = std::ranges::max_element(
>     validNames, // Correct: the following lambda is only called with valid names.
>     [](auto f1, auto f2) { return std::strlen(f1) < std::strlen(f2); }
>   );
>   return *longestNameIterator;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Compliant: std::views::filter is used instead.
  auto validNames = names | std::views::filter([](char const* e) { return e != nullptr; });

  auto longestNameIterator = std::ranges::max_element(
    validNames, // Correct: std::strlen is only called with valid names.
    std::ranges::less{},
    [](char const* name) { return std::strlen(name); }
  );

  if (longestNameIterator == validNames.end())
    return nullptr;  // No names passed the filter.

  return *longestNameIterator;
```

Please note that I am still new to ranges, so my suggestions might be wrong. I just had the following points in mind while reading the code:

- Is the call to `std::views::all` necessary?
- As far as I understand, checking if the range is empty before calling `std::ranges::max_element` requires an extra pass, and each element has to be checked against the predicate twice as a result.
- Maybe we can use a projection function instead of custom comparator?

Author: > Is the call to std::views::all necessary?

Indeed, it's not. We could also write it like this:

```cpp
auto validNames = std::views::filter(names, [](char const* e) { return e != nullptr; });
```

But I guess your version is more idiomatic.

> As far as I understand, checking if the range is empty before calling `std::ranges::max_element` requires an extra pass, and each element has to be checked against the predicate twice as a result.

It's fairly complex, I had to say, but as far as I understood, it's O(1). https://eel.is/c++draft/range.prim.empty#2 says:
* 2.1 is not applicable (not an array)
* 2.2 seems applicable: it results in https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/ranges/view_interface/empty and thus roughly in a simple `begin == sentinel_end` check.
* 2.3 is not applicable (not sized)
* 2.4 works too: `begin` is always precomputed and `end` is a sentinel.

I initially wanted to use `empty` to keep somewhat the same code structure as the noncompliant example.

> Maybe we can use a projection function instead of custom comparator?

This makes sense. Yet, it changes the code structure. So I'm not sure.

TBH, this example is a bit artificial: a for loop may be simpler to read, and it could also be rewritten as:
```cpp
char const* longestName(std::vector<char const*> const& names) {
  if (names.empty()) {
    return nullptr;
  }
  return *std::ranges::max_element(
    names,
    [](auto f1, auto f2) {
      return f1 != nullptr && f2 != nullptr && std::strlen(f1) < std::strlen(f2);
    }
  );
}
```

So in the end I'd like to use your suggestion for `names | filter` and keep the rest as close as the noncompliant code.

Reviewer: You are right, `std::ranges::empty` ends up calling `std::ranges::begin` only here, which is cached and reused inside `max_element`. Thanks for the explanation. :smile: 
I now agree with you, it is best to keep the compliant code as close as possible to the non-compliant one...
